---
title: "PHP Installation on Ubuntu"
date: 2020-01-23T18:52:25Z
draft: false
thumbnail: v1579288674/2020/php.jpg
categories: [SysAdmin]
tags: [PHP, Ubuntu, VPS]
readmore: Read the tutorial
summarize: true
---

On the way to install Nextcloud we've already completed the [initial setup of our VPS](/ubuntu-server-initial-setup/), the [installation of Nginx](/nginx-installation-on-ubuntu/) and [the installation of PostgreSQL](/postgresql-installation-on-ubuntu/).

I will now cover the installation of PHP 7.3.

I’m currently using Ubuntu 18.04, but these instructions are equally valid for other Ubuntu versions.

<!--more-->

### Install PHP

PHP (recursive acronym for _PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor_) is an open source server side scripting language, widely used to create dynamic interactive web pages.

To be able to install PHP 7.3 you first need to add a third party repository. You may not have the add-apt-repository command available, so we'll install software-properties-common first. To do both of these things, run the following commands:
```plain
# sudo apt-get install software-properties-common
# sudo add-apt-repository ppa:ondrej/php
```

With the new repository added, update the package index:
```plain
# sudo apt update
```

You can now install PHP 7.3 along with some of it most common extensions:
```plain
# sudo apt install php7.3 php7.3-fpm php7.3-pgsql php-common php7.3-cli php7.3-common php7.3-json php7.3-opcache php7.3-readline php7.3-mbstring php7.3-xml php7.3-gd php7.3-curl
```

After the installation is concluded, start the PHP 7.3 service and enable it to auto-start on boot:
```plain
# sudo systemctl start php7.3-fpm
# sudo systemctl enable php7.3-fpm
```

At any moment you can check the PHP 7.3 service status running:
```plain
# systemctl status php7.3-fpm
```

### Test PHP Processing

To test PHP Processing you first need to configure Nginx to use it for dynamic content.

This is done at the _server block_ level. For this example edit the _server block_ you've created [earlier](/nginx-installation-on-ubuntu/#set-up-a-server-block). To do so, run:
```plain
# sudo nano /etc/nginx/sites-available/emanuelpina.ml
```

And edit the _server block_ to look like this:
```nginx
server {
    listen 80;
    listen [::]:80;

    root /var/www/html;
    index index.php index.html index.htm index.nginx-debian.html;

    server_name emanuelpina.ml www.emanuelpina.ml;

    location / {
            try_files $uri $uri/ =404;
    }

    location ~ \.php$ {
        include snippets/fastcgi-php.conf;
        fastcgi_pass unix:/var/run/php/php7.3-fpm.sock;
    }
    
    location ~ /\.ht {
        deny all;
    }
}
```

Test to make sure that there are no syntax errors in the Nginx files:
```plain
# sudo nginx -t
```

If there aren’t any issues, restart Nginx to enable the changes:
```plain
# sudo systemctl reload nginx
```

Now let's create a test PHP file in the website root folder:
```plain
# sudo nano /var/www/html/info.php
```

Add the following content to the file, which is a valid PHP code that generates a page containing information about the server:
```php
<?php
phpinfo();
```

Now visiting the page `https://emanuelpina.ml/info.php` on your browser you should see a page generated by PHP containing structured information about the server.

If you see this page then Nginx is successfully communicating with PHP!

At the end of this test, don't forget to remove the PHP file you created:
```plain
# sudo rm /var/www/html/info.php
```

This is imporant because it exposes important information about the server and can make it vulnerable.

### Tune PHP

Similar to what we did with PostgreSQL, you can tune some PHP settings depending on the hardware at your disposale.[^1]

To proceed with this you need to know three things: how many CPU cores your server have; how much memory (RAM) you can dedicate to PHP; and how much memory the average PHP process consume.

To find out how many CPU cores your server has, run the following command:
```plain
# echo Cores = $(( $(lscpu | awk '/^Socket/{ print $2 }') * $(lscpu | awk '/^Core/{ print $4 }') ))
```
When determining how much memory you can dedicate to PHP, keep in mind that the server is also running Nginx and PostgreSQL. How much memory are these other processes consuming? For example, if you have 4GB of RAM and the other processes are consuming 1GB, that leaves you with 3GB – or 2GB if you want to play safe.

Finally, to get a general idea on how much memory each PHP process is consuming, run:
```plain
ps --no-headers -o "rss,cmd" -C php-fpm7.3 | awk '{ sum+=$1 } END { printf ("%d%s\n", sum/NR/1024,"M") }'
```

The settigns you need to change are all in the `www.conf` file. To edit it, run:
```plain
# sudo nano /etc/php/7.3/fpm/pool.d/www.conf
```

Search for each one of the following settings and change it accordingly.

To get a good value for **pm.max_children**, take the memory that you want to allocate to PHP and divide it by the average memory that is consumed by each PHP process. For example, if you want to allocate 2GB (2000MB) and each process consumes about 50MB. Dividing 2000 by 50 we get around 40.  
So, set pm.max_children to 40.

For **pm.start_servers**, multiply the number of cores that you have by 4.  
If you have 2 cores: 2 x 4 = 8  
So, set pm.start_servers to 8.

For **pm.min_spare_servers**, multiply the number of cores that you have by 2.  
If you have 2 cores: 2 x 2 = 4  
So, set pm.min_start_servers to 4.

For **pm.max_spare_servers**, multiply the number of cores on your server by 4.  
If you have 2 cores: 2 x 4 = 8  
So, set pm.max_start_servers to 8. The same used before for pm.start_servers.

To finish, just restart the PHP-FPM service:
```plain
# sudo systemctl restart php7.3-fpm
```

And that's all :grinning:

### What's next?

With Nginx, PostgreSQL and PHP up and running you're now ready to install Nextcloud!

{{< call-for-contribution >}}
[^1]: [PHP-FPM settings tutorial. max_servers, min_servers, etc.](https://thisinterestsme.com/php-fpm-settings/)